# Workshop: R Basics - Intro to Programming for Researchers

_[UC Davis DataLab](https://datalab.ucdavis.edu/)_  
_Spring 2021_  
_Instructor: Nick Ulle <<naulle@ucdavis.edu>>_  

This 4-part workshop series provides an introduction to using the R programming
language for reproducible data analysis and scientific computing. Topics
include programming basics, how to work with tabular data, how to break down
programming problems, and how to organize code for clarity and reproducibility.

After this workshop, learners will be able to load tabular data sets into R,
compute simple summaries and visualizations, do common data-tidying tasks,
write reusable functions, and identify where to go to learn more.

No prior programming experience is necessary. All learners will need access to
an internet-connected computer and the latest version of Zoom, R, and RStudio.


## Common Links

* Reader:
* Event Page:


## Contributing

The course reader is a live webpage, hosted through GitHub, where you can enter
curriculum content and post it to a public-facing site for learners.

To make alterations to the reader:

1.  Run `git pull`, or if it's your first time contributing, see the
    [Setup](#setup) section of this document.

2.  Edit an existing chapter file or create a new one. Chapter files are R
    Markdown files (`.Rmd`) at the top level of the repo. Enter your text,
    code, and other information directly into the file. Make sure your file:

    - Follows the naming scheme `##_topic-of-chapter.Rmd` (the only exception
      is `index.Rmd`, which contains the reader's front page).
    - Begins with a first-level header (like `# This`). This will be the title
      of your chapter. Subsequent section headers should be second-level
      headers (like `## This`) or below.
    - Uses caching for resource-intensive code (see the [Resource-intensive
      Code](#resource-intensive-code) section of this document).

    Put any supporting resources in `data/` or `img/`. For large files, see the
    [Large Files](#large-files) section of this document. You do not need to
    add resources generated by your R code (such as plots). The next step saves
    these in `docs/` automatically.

3.  Run the script `knit.R` to regenerate the HTML files in the `docs/`. You
    can do this in the shell with `./knit.R` or in R with `source("knit.R")`.

4.  When you're finished, `git add`:
    - Any files you edited directly
    - Any supporting media you added to `docs/` or `img/`
    - The entire `docs/` directory
    - The entire `_bookdown_files/` directory (contains the R Markdown cache)
    - The `.gitattributes` file (if you added a large file)

    Then `git commit` and `git push`. The live web page will update
    automatically after 1-10 minutes.


### Resource-intensive Code

If one of your code chunks takes a lot of time or memory to run, consider
caching the result, so the chunk won't run every time someone knits the
reader. To cache a code chunk, add `cache=TRUE` in the chunk header. It's
best practice to label cached chunks, like so:

````
```{r YOUR_CHUNK_NAME, cache=TRUE}
# Your code...
```
````

Cached files are stored in the `_bookdown_files/` directory. If you ever want
to clear the cache, you can delete this directory (or its subdirectories).
The cache will be rebuilt the next time you knit the reader.

Beware that caching doesn't work with some packages, especially packages that
use external libraries. Because of this, it's best to leave caching off for
code chunks that are not resource-intensive.


### Large Files

If you want to include a large file (say over 1 MB), you should use git LFS.
You can register a large file with git LFS with the shell command:

```sh
git lfs track YOUR_FILE
```

This command updates the `.gitattributes` file at the top level of the repo. To
make sure the change is saved, you also need to run:

```sh
git add .gitattributes
```

Now that your large is registered with git LFS, you can add, commit, and push
the file with git the same way you would any other file, and git LFS will
automatically intercede as needed.

GitHub provides 1 GB of storage and 1 GB of monthly bandwidth free per repo for
large files. If your large file is more than 50 MB, check with the other
contributors before adding it.


## Setup


### Git LFS

This repo uses [Git Large File Storage][git-lfs] (git LFS) for large files. If
you don't have git LFS installed, [download it][git-lfs] and run the installer.
Then in the shell (in any directory), run:

```sh
git lfs install
```

Then your one-time setup of git LFS is done. Next, clone this repo with `git
clone`. The large files will be downloaded automatically with the rest of the
repo.

[git-lfs]: https://git-lfs.github.com/


### R Packages

This repo uses [**renv**](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/) for package
management. Install **renv** according to the installation instructions on
their website.

Then open an R session at the top level of the repo and run:

```r
renv::restore()
```

This will download and install the correct versions of all the required
packages to **renv**'s package library. This is separate from your global R
package library and will not interfere with other versions of packages you have
installed.
